The present paper focuses on how the visual system deals with the
temporary disappearance of moving objects. People can continue to
track objects that disappear briefly behind occluding surfaces. Scholl
and Pylyshyn (1999) demonstrated this using a multiple object tracking
(MOT) task, in which participants track a subset of identical,
independently moving objects. Accuracy on the task was unaffected on
trials when tracked objects moved behind occluding surfaces, as
compared to trials without occlusion. However, when objects
spontaneously disappeared and then reappeared without occlusion cues,
but for the same amount of time as on occlusion trials, accuracy was
substantially decreased compared to the other trials. It appears that
the visual system assumes that an occluded object still exists and
therefore continues to track it, while an object that spontaneously
disappears must no longer exist and ceases to track it (see also
Scholl & Feigenson, 2004).

On the face of it, this is an entirely reasonable assumption: in the
real world, when you are gazing at an object, the only way it can
disappear is through occlusion. Based on the findings of Scholl and
Pylyshyn (1999), it appears that the visual system continues to track
such objects. However, objects can also disappear when gaze is shifted
temporarily, in which case all tracked objects will disappear, then
reappear, simultaneously. Given that a shift in gaze may mean that a
new set of stimuli need to be tracked, there should be some
psychological mechanism that enables disengagement from the tracking
task, followed by re-engagement and reacquisition of tracked targets.

In previous work, we have demonstrated that observers can successfully
perform a MOT task when all the stimuli disappear simultaneously for
a brief (approximately 300 ms) gap.  
