Title: Rapid Recovery of Moving Targets Following Task Disruptions

Authors: David E. Fencsik, Skyler S. Place, Melanie A. Johnson, & Todd
S. Horowitz

Word count = 274 (limit = 300)

Tracking tasks, such as monitoring traffic while driving or supervising
children on a playground, would seem to require continuous visual
attention.  In fact, we can track multiple moving objects even through
disruptions to the task, such as looking away.  How do we do this?  We have
previously suggested a mechanism that stores information about tracked
objects offline during disruption so the visual system can perform a
secondary task, then later resume tracking without complete loss (Horowitz
et al., 2006).

Here we studied the timecourse of target recovery following a brief
disruption.  Participants tracked a set of moving targets among identical
moving distractors.  During tracking, all objects disappeared
simultaneously, then reappeared after a brief gap (133-507 ms).  Objects
continued to move during the gap.  At a variable delay following
reappearance, one object was probed.  Participants identified the probed
object as a target or distractor.  RT decreased over probe delays of
roughly 0-50 ms following reappearance, then remained constant.

We developed a model based on the assumption that the visual system takes X
ms to recover the targets following the gap.  Under this model, RTs at
probe delays of 0 ms reflect baseline response time plus X ms of recovery
time, RTs at probe delays between 0-X ms decline linearly as a function of
probe delay with a slope of -1, and RTs at probe delays greater than X ms
reflect just baseline response time.

The model fits the data well when X is around 45 ms.  This value did not
change as a function of gap duration or tracking load.  These results
suggest that recovery of tracked objects following disruption occurs
rapidly and in parallel.
