Target reacquisition strategies in multiple object tracking

David E. Fencsik, Todd S. Horowitz, Sarah B. Klieger, and Jeremy M. Wolfe

Observers in multi-element tracking experiments can successfully track
a subset of randomly moving identical objects, even if all of the
objects disappear for 300-400 ms (e.g., Alvarez, Wolfe, Horowitz, &
Arsenio, VSS 01). This interval is too long for apparent motion
mechanisms to bridge the gap. How does the visual system reacquire the
target objects? Here we test two approaches to target
reacquisition. According to a location-matching account, the system
keeps track of the location of each target at the time of
disappearance. After the gap, the closest object to each target
location is identified as a target. According to the
trajectory-matching account, the system takes into account the traget
trajectorties at the time of disappearance and searches along the
trajectory after the gap. In the experiments reported here, observers
tracked 5 out of 10 dark gray disks moving randomly on a light gray
background for 5 sec. At a random time during the tracking interval,
all the objects disappeared for a 300 ms gap, then reappeared at
various distances from their pre-gap locations. In experiment 1,
objects appeared either at the point of disappearance (position 0) or
at the appropriate location expected given a constant direction and
velocity from the time of disappearance (position 1). Performance was
superior at position 0, supporting a location-matching account. In
experiment 2, however, we added position -1, which was as far behind
position 0 along the trajectory as position 1 was ahead. The
location-matching account predicts that performance should be best at
position 0 and equal for positions -1 and 1. Instead, we found that
position -1 produced performance superior to position 1, and not
significantly different from position 0. This result indicates that
the visual system takes into account the history of an object's motion
trajectory when reacquiring targets.

Supported by NIH grant MH065576 to TSH.
